# EmergEnsure

All types of Computer Networks rely on the concept of statistical multiplexing to operate efficiently. Statistical multiplexing relies on the fact that network traffic is bursty, and that most of the time a network customer is not actually using any bandwidth. Because of this, a service provider does not actually have to build infrastructure that could serve all of its customers at once to guarantee with high probability that each customer will get the bandwidth they are paying for. The larger a network is, the more money could be saved by applying statistical multiplexing. So it is no surprise that wireless companies offer service to many more customers than its infrastructure could actually handle at once. This is more efficient, but also much less secure. It is a common occurrence that during natural disasters, terrorist attacks, and other sudden-call events wireless service is halted because of the strain due to a surge in traffic. However, it is also critical that people are able to get in touch with loved ones to see if they are  okay, and as of now, those available.
We are the senior team of Ryan Marren, Peter Woo, Chris Lovrin, Zack Reiter, Max Kaplan and Keith Carreon, and our application, which we have decided to name EmergEnsure, is designed to allow people to more easily contact their loved ones while also lowering network traffic to make room for other data to be transferred.
	Our application was designed with a proactive approach in mind. By having people set up their emergency contact networks prior to an emergency, less communication will be necessary. Additionally, this will streamline the process in a post-emergency scenario. Users will not waste time with the application, and it would prevent the excessive data usage of installing the application, which would most likely be unavailable in the situation.
	The application itself will mainly utilize SMS(Short Message Service) as its medium of communication. The reason for doing so is efficiency. SMS is a simple way to deliver a message while minimizing network resources and transfer data via the phone’s signaling channel rather than the data and voice channels. After the user reports his/her status, the application will attempt to send an SMS. If this fails, it will resort to other channels of communication, but the SMS channel is optimal. The data transferred using this SMS will also use a shorthand code that the application will be able to decipher in order to fit as much information possible into the 160 available characters. This information will be filled out in plaintext by the user and then the application will compress it for transfer. In addition to this feature, our application will have an emergency feature which will automatically alert both family members and emergency services of either the current location of the user (if GPS is available), the last stored location of the user (if GPS is not available and this information is stored), and/or a manually entered location by the user (the user can choose this option first if he/she believes the GPS estimation will not be accurate). This feature would be much more useful if the user gives our application permission to store acquire and store GPS data periodically.
	There will also be a prioritization system for the application. When users input their status into the network their data will be entered as nodes within a number of queues. The nodes at the front of a queue will be the ones having their data published to others immediately. Depending on certain criteria, the nodes may be moved closer to the front or back of the queue. For example, a person who reports that they are in need of urgent help will have his/her message sent to the front of the queue, while the message of another person who reports that he/she is OK will not be. Using this methodology, we can first help those in need, and then relay the information to those close to the victims in emergency situations. The nodes will contain several variables including urgency, name, date, time, GPS coordinates, and a short comment section, if they wish to use the remaining characters.
	The inspiration for this application came from the cellular blackout that occurred in the northeastern region during Hurricane Sandy. We have searched for other emergency communication applications, but most are designed for use by first responders to transfer critical information. Our application is aimed toward less urgent but still critical information transfer between families, and will hopefully make the more urgent communication easier by minimizing data transfer.
